index.md, before:

## Azure Test Plans  
Welcome to [Azure Test Plans](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/test-plans/)! The Azure Test Plans engineering team uses this space to document interesting tidbits, issues, workarounds and best practices related to Test Plans.

## Contributing  
If you find an issue with this documentation or want to add a new page, feel free to send a pull request [here](https://github.com/pkuma-msft/pkuma-msft.github.io).

## Topics  
Click on [Azure Test Plans Topics](/azure-test-plans/index.md) to take a look at all the topics.
  

## Learn more about Azure Test Plans  
- [Azure Test Plans official documentation](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/test-plans/)

- [Deep dive into Azure Test Plans](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/deep-dive-into-azure-test-plans/)

- [Azure Test Plans Deep Dive on-demand session](https://info.microsoft.com/IN-AZUREPLAT-WBNR-FY19-04Apr-08-AzureTestPlans-MCW0012706_LP02OnDemandRegistration-ForminBody.html)

- [Exploratory and Manual Testing Scenarios](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/test/overview?view=azure-devops)

- [Test Planning and Management with Azure Test Plans (lab)](https://azuredevopslabs.com/labs/azuredevops/testmanagement/)

Commit message:

adding marketplace article
adding marketplace article

index.md, after:

## Azure Test Plans and Marketplace  
Welcome to [Azure Test Plans](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/test-plans/)! The Azure Test Plans and Marketplace engineering team uses this space to document interesting tidbits, issues, workarounds and best practices related to Test Plans and Marketplace.

## Contributing  
If you find an issue with this documentation or want to add a new page, feel free to send a pull request [here](https://github.com/pkuma-msft/pkuma-msft.github.io).

## Topics  
Click on [Azure Test Plans Topics](/azure-test-plans/index.md) to take a look at all the topics.
Click on [Marketplace Topics](/marketplace/index.md) to take a look at all the topics.
  

## Learn more about Azure Test Plans  
- [Azure Test Plans official documentation](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/devops/test-plans/)

- [Deep dive into Azure Test Plans](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/blog/deep-dive-into-azure-test-plans/)

- [Azure Test Plans Deep Dive on-demand session](https://info.microsoft.com/IN-AZUREPLAT-WBNR-FY19-04Apr-08-AzureTestPlans-MCW0012706_LP02OnDemandRegistration-ForminBody.html)

- [Exploratory and Manual Testing Scenarios](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/devops/test/overview?view=azure-devops)

- [Test Planning and Management with Azure Test Plans (lab)](https://azuredevopslabs.com/labs/azuredevops/testmanagement/)
